Javier, I would like you to tell us what the analysis process is like to contextualize it.
A startup wants to access financing, contacts investors and I would like to know how it is
from the other side, that is, not from the perspective of the startup, which seems to be
what we have told several times, but from the perspective of the investor, what is this
analysis process and how is the relationship with the startup?
I think that entrepreneurs often have a wrong vision of why investors do things.
I would like us to have that extreme vision of why investors sometimes make decisions,
what they look at, what worries them, sometimes even how the dynamics are, if we are talking
about a fund, within the fund itself.
The first thing to understand is that each investor has some investment criteria and this, although
it seems super obvious, means that your company may be a pass and that an investor rejects it.
And that does not mean that your company is not good and sometimes this, for the entrepreneur's ego,
when he rejects you 4, you say, damn, maybe I'm wrong and I'm setting up badly.
Well, it may be because it does not fit the criteria, because the investor does not have money.
One of the things that must be understood is that investors have our liquidity cycles
and then, if we are talking about a business angel, for example, he has been investing
for 5 years and has invested a lot, but right now he does not have liquidity.
As the exits of his participants come out, he will start to have liquidity.
Yes, there are many people who think that business angels have a money printing machine.
If someone has it, let us know that we will be delighted to invest.
That on the one hand, but then also, for example, the funds have their times.
That is, one thing that almost no one on the entrepreneur's side understands is that a fund is not an element
where there is money and they invest as they see fit, but normally the funds have
investment policies.
The investment policy, for example, comes that I invest in a 5 plus 5 fund.
That means that during the first 5 years I do look for new investments and the other
5 years I simply dedicate myself to accompany the initial investments that I have made.
So, if you come to see me in the year 4 and a half, it is that it is very difficult for me to
make investment decisions.
So, the first thing, and it is something that we entrepreneurs forget, is that we have
to ask the investor when he is, how much he usually invests on average per operation,
whether he accompanies or not.
And just like an investor does a due diligence, which now we get a little into that, you as
a founder have to do a due diligence and ask, hey, this investor is good, bad, etc.
So, typically, hey, great, we have contacted the investor and he asks us for more information.
Typically, the first information he is going to ask us is going to be the famous pitch deck,
the presentation between investors, which there are a thousand million articles that explain
how to do it.
I think that does not have a huge...
Well, in the Power MBA we explain it in detail.
Well, great, that's super valuable.
We share examples, etc.
Well, very valuable.
But that presentation, in the end, is used first to see that there is a fit with the criteria
and then it also serves to assess that we are talking about the correct magnitudes, because
sometimes it is not only about whether there is a fit or not, but maybe the size of the
minimum ticket you are asking for is too large or too small.
And this, unfortunately, lately happens that sometimes it is too little what you are asking for.
And this is a bit paradigmatic sometimes.
So, with that presentation, a series of additional data is usually asked, hey, what box do you
have, what is the billing, etc., which are very numerical data that the investor uses
to match them against his investment thesis.
There is one thing that sometimes we forget is that investors have their own investment
thesis and it is, hey, I invest as a maximum in this number of companies, in these characteristics,
with this billing level, with this team composition.
So, there is a first step that is almost logical to say, hey, this fits or does not fit
in my criteria.
It's like a filter, right?
It's a first filter.
It's a checkpoint, I invest in projects B2C, in this phase, etc.
And they pass through here and some, like a fan, some stay out.
Literally.
So, the first thing you do is ask for the necessary information to see if you go through
that filter or not.
Correct.
What the entrepreneur can do at that moment is to do the work proactively and see if
the investor's page is read, which is one thing, I was surprised by the number of entrepreneurs
who do not read who they are asking for money.
This is a relevant issue.
So, read first so that they don't waste your time.
It is no longer that you waste the time of the investor, no, that in the end it is his job
and it is the one that you do not lose and that you hit with the shot.
So, hey, great, it fits reasonably well in the criteria.
Now what we are going to look at is the five T's, okay?
That is, in another video we have talked about the different criteria that an investor has
to decide whether a company is interesting or not.
And here we talk about the size of the market, the attraction, the technology, etc.
What does that imply?
That implies that they are not only going to ask you for that information, but if the investor
is medium-sized, he is going to do a job of analysis and attempt to search and contextualize
what you are doing.
And that makes me curious, how is that analysis done?
Well, normally...
How many resources are dedicated, depending on whether you do it more deeply or not, the
decisions or the conclusions you make vary a lot.
Correct.
Let's see, first there is a superpower that investors have, and that is that we see a
lot of companies.
And then there is already a certain information of the context of the market that we have regarding
several markets.
But even so, we all have, if it is a business engineer, because he usually does it, if it
is an investment fund or someone who operates with a more fixed structure, in our case
there are a series of analysts who analyze that, who know the markets well, in some
funds they are even verticalized, specialists only in fashion, etc.
So obviously, the later and more resources you are going to dedicate to a company and the
more you are going to invest, the deeper that analysis of the market.
And above all, what is very important is to put this in context with the entrepreneur.
Hey, this is like this, this is not like this.
You have the competence, what is your differential advantage?
And the composition of the place will be understood a little better.
Having a small analysis of the team, that is, talking to the founders, understanding
the dynamics that they have among them.
It is super important how your shareholder table is designed.
There are things that automatically put you in a business that is wonderful.
If you are shareholders where the founders have 10% of the company, then automatically
many investors are not going to invest.
We like that founders have a lot of participation in the company.
In the end, it is the guarantee that it will go well, that you create it and that it is your business.
Yes, we have seen that if the founders, who are the ones who bring value within the team
of...
Well, yes, within the founding team, if they are already very diluted because everyone has entered
around them, then it is a complex situation.
Correct.
So that is one of the key points.
For me, another of the points that is very important and that not so many people do is
product analysis.
And this is something that clashes a bit with the famous investment criteria.
If we have said that two of our analysis legs of a good investor are technology and
differential advantages, which are often interrelated with each other, if there is no
product or analysis team, how is this going to be analyzed?
That is, good investors have people who also analyze the product, because in the end, in
many cases it is the basis of the competitive advantage.
A financial analysis is done, a financial analysis of the legal part, which is one of the most important.
And the legal part is not just about whether they have the contracts to date and such, which
in the end most startups always have or have something that can be improved.
Many times it has to do more, for example, with the partnership pact, how it is designed,
if it has things that do not make much sense, etc.
If all this is fulfilled and the company fits the criteria and others, it is when the company
offers a deal.
All this involves several processes of inquiries, information, etc.
And above all, what is very important to understand and that sometimes companies miss,
the investment of this style of companies is a risk investment.
So it is not about investing the least bad, but the best.
And this is a topic that sometimes we forget.
We are thinking of mitigating a lot of risks and I do not want to go to the one that has the
mitigated risks, but I want to go to the one that if it goes well, it will do better.
And then that is the key.
It is when all this happens, when the time comes to say, okay, now we are going to sign
the famous term sheet, which is where I propose some conditions for investment, financial terms,
legal and control terms, etc.
And then a second negotiation process comes in.
Ideally, everything is ok, there is usually a process of financial and legal due diligence,
there is a third, independent.
Or parallel to the negotiation.
Typically it is usually, and here it depends on the moment in which we are entering.
If it is a business, there is never a due diligence.
It depends on the moment in which it invests and the risk that the investor takes,
the more risk, the more you want to ensure that everything is controlled.
So there is a due diligence that in the end what it does is analyze that everything you have said
so far is true.
If there is a golden rule in this world, it is that you never lie.
Many times we sometimes say little lies because it is a shame that something is not in the company
and we always say it in a lot of companies and we know the miseries that all the start-ups have
and nothing happens, it is like that.
But the worst thing you can do is tell a lie.
Yes, because they will catch you.
Always.
They will catch you if the relationship continues, they will catch you for sure.
Correct.
So this, I always say that there is a very important factor and intangible in this analysis,
which is the beer factor.
In other words, you always have to invest and you always have to let someone invest in you
when you feel like having a beer.
If not, at that moment, where we are in the moment of love idyll, when things get complicated
and when they get complicated, it will be very complicated.
That is a bit part of the initial analysis of the company.
I do a review and if it is not correct, you tell me.
Of course.
The first thing you do is, professional investors like you, the first thing you do is,
I call it short list, but you can call it whatever you want,
and it is that you receive an ingenious amount of projects.
Correct.
Many people have not even read the criteria and they have not even sent them, but hey.
And the point is that you have a series of filters or criteria or requirements, each one of yours.
Imagine, my company, and I do not say startups, I say my company does not invest in companies
from outside Europe, I do not invest in rounds of more than a million euros, I do not invest
in the gambling sector, for example.
You do not invest in B2B, whatever, but a series of criteria that are objective.
And if you do not meet them, you do not pass.
And this is like a filter in which many companies stay outside and others enter.
Correct.
The percentage will depend, right?
They enter.
So here come the criteria for evaluating the investment that you have told us about
previously in another class.
You told us about 5Ts, about the team, about the attraction, about the technology,
you talked about the product too, which is very interesting.
Here it is about analyzing the potential.
That's it.
That is, the first one, if you want, is a risk filter, and the second is just the opposite.
So, hey, if these guys do well in the business, how big can this business be?
You talked about the cap table, that they are not too deluded, you have a series of...
Of analyzing the company.
That, of analyzing the company.
Subsequently, a small percentage receives an offer with the term sheet, which is the sheet of terms...
Of terms where the operation is proposed.
And a negotiation begins, which I understand will last, I don't know, a couple of months,
I don't know what the deadline would be.
It depends on the phase in which you are.
There are many of these phases that, if you are talking about a business angel,
they will be much faster, because many of the business angels,
as you advance in the maturity process of the company,
it weighs less on trust, that is, when you invest in the 3Fs,
it is trusted by the founder or the founders, period.
There is no other disquisition.
The more you advance in the process, the weight of trust in the founder
changes with the importance of the business.
So, the heavier the business, the more relevant it is to analyze the business well.
The business that invests close to this phase has a lot to do with the trust in the founder team
and, of course, there are signs and missions of attraction.
Indeed.
And during the negotiation process, or the last part,
the business angels, the most professional investors,
like venture capital, etc.,
you do a due diligence, in which you basically raise the carpets
and make sure that what they have told you is true
and that there is no story that can compromise the potential.
No relevant story.
99% of companies have something, some nonsense,
something that has happened to them,
that is, there is nothing that can really put the operation in danger.
That's it.